 Let's shrink an elephant to the size of a mouse and in large amounts and make it the size of an elephant because this is our video and we want to see what happens. First, our now tiny elephant stumbles around and then drops dead. Tiny elephant buddy is very cold frozen to death in minutes. Our giant mouse looks very uncomfortable for a moment and then it explodes, leaving hot mouse in size everywhere. Why? Because of size. We are optimized to function precisely for the size we are and would die horribly in any other environment. But why exactly? Why does our mouse explode and can we do this to our elephant too if we try hard? Life on this planet is based on cells. Cells do vary in size but they are pretty similar in their dimensions across all species. A blue whale doesn't have bigger cells than a hummingbird just a lot more of them. Cells have to do a lot of stuff to stay alive and they need energy to be able to do so. To get this energy, animal cells convert food and oxygen into usable chemical energy. This happens in our mitochondria, the powerhouse of the cell. They are like little coal engines that spit out tiny ATP batteries which the cell can use for almost everything it needs to do. Just like an engine, mitochondria get really hot while working. In human skin cells, they reach a scorching 50°C and some of our cells have up to 2000 to mitochondria which are radiating their heat into the cell. So being alive generates a lot of heat. The more cells you have, the more heat your body generates in total. If our bodies didn't find ways of losing this heat, we would be cooked from the inside and die. But this is a problem for bigger animals because of the way bodies change as living being scaled up. Animals have three properties here that are important. They're length, they're outside or skin and they're inside like organs, bones and hopes and dreams. The thing that's hard to wrap your head around is that when things grow, they're inside grow faster than they're outside. Imagine a fleshy cube. If you double the length of its sides, its surface and volume do not double. In fact, the surface is now four times the original size and the volume of the cube eight times the original size, which is called the square cube law and has been a nine major for billions of years. So why is this a problem for big animals? Because heat can only leave an object via its surface. So if we make our mouse the size of an elephant or 60 times longer, it has 3,600 times more surface from which to lose heat. But it has 216,000 times more volume filled with trillions and trillions of new hot mitochondria that produce more heat. A lot more insights not that much more skin. Our mouse is very dead very fast. But big things like elephants exist so how do they deal with the heat? The one they have evolved ways to get rid of energy more easily, like huge flat ears that have a lot of surface where heat can escape. But that's not enough, nature's solution is actually very elegant. Elephant cells are much much slower than my cells. The bigger an animal is, the less active it cells are. If we classify animals by their metabolic rates and compare that to their overall mass, it's clearly visible. It's not 100% accurate, but it is a good rule of thumb. Elephants are huge meat sacks filled with trillions and trillions of little coal ovens. So they keep the ovens just active enough to keep the running and never it full power. Their home metabolism is slow. Things move at a nice chill pace. Small animals need to go the exact opposite way. If you're small you have a lot of surface area compared to not a lot of volume. You don't have a lot of cell ovens and lose the heat they produce very fast. So very tiny mammals came up with a very extreme solution. Meet the Atruscan Shroom, the smallest mammal on earth. A more like thing that's more closely related to catch hogs than to mice. With the body length of 4 cm, it only weighs about 1.8 grams, as much as a paperclip. It's a tiny ridiculous being. It would basically cool off immediately so it sells run on overdrive to stay warm. Its tiny ovens are filled at maximum capacity. It's hard to beat up to 1200 times a minute and it brings up to 800 times a minute. This creates an extreme need for energy so the shrew has to eat constantly. After only 4 hours without food it starts to death. And while an African elephant consumes around 4% of its body weight in food each day, our shrew needs 200% of its body weight in food a day just to survive. Imagine having to eat 2000 big max a day, more than one a minute, fun for a while, but they're not so much. So a cubic centimeter of shrew needs 40 times more food than a cubic centimeter of elephant. If an elephant sells, suddenly become as active as the cells of a shrew, a crazy amount of heat would be generated. All the liquids in the elephant would suddenly start boiling and then it would explode in an impressive explosion of steaming hot burning elephant parts. In reality before an explosion occurred, the proteins making up our cells would probably be detonated and stop producing heat. But a meat explosion is much more fun than melting an elephant into a massive hot goo. Regardless, the scaling of the speed of metabolism happens everywhere, even in places we don't expect, like pregnant women. A baby in the womb of its mother behaves as if it were a part of her. But cells have about the same metabolic rate, the same speed of life as its mother's organs. It is truly a part of a bigger whole rather than an individual. Until it's not anymore. The very moment a baby is born, a switch is flipped and all its internal processes speed are rapidly. 36 hours after birth, the baby's cells have the same activity rate as a mamnid size. The baby's literally transition from being an organ to being an individual in mere hours. But there's one thing where big and small things are very similar, heartbeat. Mamnils tend to have a similar amount of heartbeat over their lifetime, typically around one billion. So while the true and elephant are very different, they share a similar number of heart beats over the course of their lives. Their speed of life is the opposite and somehow still the same. And for a video in which we made elephants explode for no good reason, this is the most romantic ending we could come up with.