 Oh dear, just when you thought the Arab problem was solved because you haven't heard about it for a while, everything's back to murderous chaos and terror. What happened? In 2003, the US invaded Iraq because of its alleged connections to terrorism and weapons of mass destruction, and the times Saddam Hussein, a brutal dictator, all the country. He was part of the Suleymanarity and suppressed the sheer majority. Iraq was conquered fairly quickly, but the US had no pen for the country. The until then suppressed sheer majority took over and began oppressing the sun is because suppressing other fateslars proven to be such a good idea. Unsurprisingly, a Suley rebel uprising began and terrorist groups like Al-Qaeda trickled into Iraq and local forces often form a Suley military began fighting the US troops and the newly formed Iraqi state, peaking in a bloody civil war in 2006. Since then, people in Iraq have basically been segregated by religion. So in a tragic irony of history, the US invasion led to the formation of the very terrorists that the US wanted to eliminate in the first place because Iraq was now the perfect training ground for terrorism. To understand this complicated conflict better, we need to understand the relationship between the two main branches of the Muslim faith. Shia and Suley is lamb. Suley is made up about 80% of the Muslim world and Shia about 20%. And the hardliners on both sides don't like each other very much. Saudi Arabia and Iran are the two most powerful players in the game of faiths. They both have no separation of state and religion, domestic problems, and a lot of oil money. And they support groups that fight the other religious orientation. And what others terror organizations supported by Saudi Arabia was the Islamic state in Iraq, or I aside for short. In 2010 the Arab Spring happened and changed the whole situation in the Middle East. In Syria, dictator Bashir Al-Assad didn't think much of resigning and started a gruesome civil war against his own people. The longer the war went on, the more foreign groups joined the fight, most of them four religious reasons, and with the goal of building an Islamic state in the region. And one of them was the infamous ISI which now became the Islamic state in Iraq and Syria or ISIS. They had fought in Iraq for years and had thousands of well-trained and fanatic soldiers. They already quasi-controlled parts of northern Iraq and were very determined to build their religious state. And they changed the game in Syria like no one expected. ISIS was so unbelievably violent and radical that soon it was at war with almost every other faction of the Syrian rebel armies. They attacked and killed members of other Muslim terrorist groups. In the territories they controlled their built in Islamic state with rules so strict that even the hardliners of al-Qaeda and Saudi Arabia were shocked and withdrew their support. ISIS has been accused of responsibility for multiple massacres against civilians, cut this suicide bombings, the hostage taking of women and children, the execution of their prisoners and badings. All kinds of medieval horrors we would rather not have to a distraint. And this lovely gathering of human beings recently decided it was time to take more territory in Iraq. Since the US left Iraq, the sheer Prime Minister Nuri Al-Malikki has been off-liceed power and discriminated against Sunnis wherever possible. The government to the Iraq is widely regarded as being corrupt, incapable, and it's certainly hated by a large part of its citizens. The Iraqi army consisting of about 300,000 soldiers was created using 25 billion US dollars in tax money but it's not more to its government and has been withdrawing all completely disbanding, giving up city after city. Because ISIS has announced that everyone who opposes them will be killed, they have proven they mean business. By June 2014, they'd conquered a big chunk of Iraq, including Mosul, Iraq's second largest city. They'd stolen hundreds of millions from captured banks, making them the richest terror organisation on earth, and they are constantly working on establishing a super medieval religious state. Iran and the US are even considering working together to fight them. That's how gruesome the situation is. Events in Iraq show again that, despite the people you've defeated in a war, denying them power, a living and a stake in the rebuilding of the country, is just so in the seeds of the next bout of violence. Somehow we have to break this circle.