 There are probably 10,000 stars for every grain of sand on Earth in the observable universe. We know that there might be trillions of planets, so where are all the aliens? This is the Family Paradox. If you want to know more about it, watch part 1. Here we look at possible solutions to the Family Paradox. So, will we be destroyed or does a glorious future await us? Space travel is hard, although possible it's an enormous challenge to travel to other stars. Massive amounts of material have to be put into orbit and assembled. A journey of maybe thousands of years, leads to be survived by a population big enough to start from scratch. And the planet might not be as hospitable as it seemed from afar. It was already extremely hard to set up a spaceship that could survive the trip. An interstellar invasion might be impossible to put off. Also, consider time. The universe is very old. On Earth, there's been life for about 3.6 billion years. Intelligent human life for about 250,000 years, but only for about a centric have we had the technology to communicate over great distances. There might have been grand alien empires that stretched across thousands of systems and existed for millions of years only might just have missed them. There might be grandiose ruins rotting away on distant worlds. 99% of all species on Earth have died out. It's easy to argue that this will be our fate sooner or later. Intelligent life may develop spread over a few systems and die off over and over again. But galactic civilizations might never meet, so maybe it's a unifying experience for life in the universe to look at the stars and wonder, where is everyone? But there is no reason to assume aliens aren't like us, or that our logic applies to them. It might just be that our means of communication are extremely primitive and outdated. Imagine sitting in a house with a more code transmitter. You'd keep sending messages, but nobody would answer, and you'd feel pretty lonely. Maybe we're still undetectable for intelligent species, and we'll remain so until we learn to communicate properly. And even if we met aliens, we might be too different to be able to communicate with them in a meaningful way. Imagine the smartest squirrel you can. No matter how hard you try, you won't be able to explain our society to it. After all, from the squirrels perspective, a tree is all that a sophisticated intelligence like itself needs to survive. So, humans cutting down whole forests is madness, but we don't destroy forests because we hate squirrels, which is one of the resources. The squirrel's wishes and the squirrel survival are of no consent to us. A type 3 civilization in need of resources may treat us in a similar way. They might just evaporate our oceans to make collecting whatever they need easier. One of the aliens might think for a second, who, tiny netlapes, they build really cute concrete structures. Oh well, now they're dead, before activating warp speed. But if there is a civilization out there that wants to eliminate other species, it's a full more likely that it will be motivated by culture rather than by economics. And anyway, it will be more effective to automate the process by constructing the perfect weapon. A self-replicating space probe made from nanomashines. They operate on a molecular level incredibly fast and deadly, with the power to attack and dismantle anything in an instant. You only need to give them four instructions. One, find a planet with life. Two, disassemble everything on this planet into its component parts. Three, use the resources to build new space probes. Four, repeat. A doomsday machine like this could render a galaxy starry in a few million years. But why would you fly light years together resources or commit genocide? The speed of light is actually not very fast. If someone could travel at the speed of light, it would still take 100,000 years to cross the Milky Way once, and you'll probably travel way slower. There might be way more enjoyable things than destroying civilizations and building empires. An interesting concept is the Mad Triuschka brain, a mega structure surrounding a star. A computer of such computing power that an entire species could upload their consciousness and exist in a simulated universe. Potentially one could experience an eternity of pure ecstasy without ever being bored or sad. A perfect life. If built around a red dwarf, this computer could be powered for up to 10 trillion years. Who would want to conquer the galaxy or make contact with other life forms if this were an option? All these solutions to the Fermi Paradox have one problem. We don't know where the borders of technology are. We could be close to the limit or nowhere near it, and super technology awaits us, granting us immortality, transporting us to other galaxies, elevating us to the level of gods. One thing we do have to acknowledge is that we really don't know anything. Humans have spent more than 90% of their existence as hunter-gatherers. 500 years ago we thought we were the centre of the universe. 200 years ago we stopped using human neighbour as the main source of energy. 30 years ago we had a pocket-lip tick weapons pointed to each other because of political disagreements, and the galactic timescale we are embryos. We've come far, but still have a long way to go. The mindset that we really are the centre of the universe is still strong in humans, so it's easy to make arrogant assumptions about life in the universe. But in the end, there's only one way to find out, right? Hey everybody, we finally have our own subreddit. Come by for surveys, discussions about future videos, if it's used and stuff like that. This video was made possible by your support on Patreon. If you want us to make more videos and maybe get your own bird avatar in return, check it out.